The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iliad of Homer, by Homer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Iliad of Homer

Author: Homer

Translator: Andrew Lang, M.A., Walter Leaf, Litt.D., And Ernest Myers, M.A.

Posting Date: January 14, 2012 [EBook #3059]
Release Date: February, 2002

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD OF HOMER ***




Produced by Sandra Stewart <unfettered@aol.com> and Jim
Tinsley <jtinsley@pobox.com>









THE ILIAD OF HOMER



PREFATORY NOTE



The execution of this version of the ILIAD has been entrusted to the
three Translators in the following three parts:

     Books      I. - IX.     .  .  .  .  W. Leaf.
       "        X. - XVI.    .  .  .  .  A. Lang.
       "     XVII. - XXIV.   .  .  .  .  E. Myers.

Each Translator is therefore responsible for his own portion; but
the whole has been revised by all three Translators, and the
rendering of passages or phrases recurring in more than one portion
has been determined after deliberation in common. Even in these,
however, a certain elasticity has been deemed desirable.

On a few doubtful points, though very rarely, the opinion of two of
the translators has had to be adopted to the suppression of that
held by the third. Thus, for instance, the Translator of Books
X. - XVI. Would have preferred "c" and "us" to "k" and "os" in the
spelling of all proper names.

The text followed has been that of La Roche (Leipzig, 1873), except
where the adoption of a different reading has been specified in a
footnote. Where the balance of evidence, external and internal, has
seemed to the Translator to be against the genuineness of the
passage, such passage has been enclosed in brackets [].

The Translator of Books X. - XVI. Has to thank Mr. R.W. Raper,
Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, for his valuable aid in revising
the proof-sheets of these Books.


NOTE TO REVISED EDITION


In the present Edition the translation has been carefully revised
throughout, and numerous minor corrections have been made. The Notes
at the end of the volume have been, with a few exceptions, omitted;
one of the Translators hopes to publish very shortly a Companion to
the Iliad for English readers, which will deal fully with most of
the points therein referred to.

The use of square brackets has in this edition been restricted to
passages where there is external evidence, such as absence from the
best MSS., for believing in interpolation. One or two departures
from this Rule are noticed in footnotes.

November 1891



The reader will perhaps also be helped by the following list of the
Greek and Latin names of the gods and goddesses who play important
parts in the narrative. When the Greek names are new to him, the
corresponding Latin names may be more familiar.

      Greek                 Latin
      -----                 -----
      Zeus.                 Jupiter.
      Hera.                 Juno.
      (Pallas) Athene.      Minerva.
      Aphrodite.            Venus.
      Poseidon.             Neptune.
      Ares.                 Mars.
      Hephaestus.           Vulcan.





    The sacred soil of Ilios is rent
      With shaft and pit; foiled waters wander slow
    Through plains where Simois and Scamander went
      To war with gods and heroes long ago.
    Not yet to dark Cassandra lying low
      In rich Mycenae do the Fates relent;
    The bones of Agamemnon are a show,
      And ruined is his royal monument.
    The dust and awful treasures of the dead
      Hath learning scattered wide; but vainly thee,
    Homer, she meteth with her Lesbian lead,
      And strives to rend thy songs, too blind is she
    To know the crown on thine immortal head
      Of indivisible supremacy.                      A.L.


    Athwart the sunrise of our western day
      The form of great Achilles, high and clear,
      Stands forth in arms, wielding the Pelian spear.
    The sanguine tides of that immortal fray,
    Swept on by gods, around him surge and sway,
      Wherethrough the helms of many a warrior peer,
      Strong men and swift, their tossing plumes uprear.
    But stronger, swifter, goodlier he than they,
    More awful, more divine. Yet mark anigh;
      Some fiery pang hath rent his soul within,
       Some hovering shade his brows encompasseth.
    What gifts hath Fate for all his chivalry?
      Even such as hearts heroic oftenest win;
       Honour, a friend, anguish, untimely death.   E.M.




THE ILIAD OF HOMER


BOOK I.

    How Agamemnon and Achilles fell out at the siege of Troy;
    and Achilles withdrew himself from battle, and won from Zeus
    a pledge that his wrong should be avenged on Agamemnon and
    the Achaians.

Sing, goddess, the wrath of Achilles Peleus' son, the ruinous wrath that
brought on the Achaians woes innumerable, and hurled down into Hades
many strong souls of heroes, and gave their bodies to be a prey to dogs
and all winged fowls; and so the counsel of Zeus wrought out its
accomplishment from the day when first strife parted Atreides king of
men and noble Achilles.

Who among the gods set the twain at strife and variance? Apollo, the son
of Leto and of Zeus; for he in anger at the king sent a sore plague upon
the host, so that the folk began to perish, because Atreides had done
dishonour to Chryses the priest. For the priest had come to the
Achaians' fleet ships to win his daughter's freedom, and brought a
ransom beyond telling; and bare in his hands the fillet of Apollo the
Far-darter upon a golden staff; and made his prayer unto all the
Achaians, and most of all to the two sons of Atreus, orderers of the
host; "Ye sons of Atreus and all ye well-greaved Achaians, now may the
gods that dwell in the mansions of Olympus grant you to lay waste the
city of Priam, and to fare happily homeward; only set ye my dear child
free, and accept the ransom in reverence to the son of Zeus, far-darting
Apollo."

Then all the other Achaians cried assent, to reverence the priest and
accept his goodly ransom; yet the thing pleased not the heart of
Agamemnon son of Atreus, but he roughly sent him away, and laid stern
charge upon him, saying: "Let me not find thee, old man, amid the hollow
ships, whether tarrying now or returning again hereafter, lest the staff
and fillet of the god avail thee naught. And her will I not set free;
nay, ere that shall old age come on her in our house, in Argos, far from
her native land, where she shall ply the loom and serve my couch. But
depart, provoke me not, that thou mayest the rather go in peace."

So said he, and the old man was afraid and obeyed his word, and fared
silently along the shore of the loud-sounding sea. Then went that aged
man apart and prayed aloud to king Apollo, whom Leto of the fair locks
bare: "Hear me, god of the silver bow, that standest over Chryse and
holy Killa, and rulest Tenedos with might, O Smintheus! If ever I built
a temple gracious in thine eyes, or if ever I burnt to thee fat flesh of
thighs of bulls or goats, fulfil thou this my desire; let the Danaans
pay by thine arrows for my tears."

So spake he in prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him, and came down from
the peaks of Olympus wroth at heart, bearing on his shoulders his bow
and covered quiver. And the arrows clanged upon his shoulders in wrath,
as the god moved; and he descended like to night. Then he sate him aloof
from the ships, and let an arrow fly; and there was heard a dread
clanging of the silver bow. First did the assail the mules and fleet
dogs, but afterward, aiming at the men his piercing dart, he smote; and
the pyres of the dead burnt continually in multitude.

Now for nine days ranged the god's shafts through the host; but on the
tenth Achilles summoned the folk to assembly, for in his mind did
goddess Hera of white arms put the thought, because she had pity on the
Danaans when she beheld them perishing. Now when they had gathered and
were met in assembly, then Achilles fleet of foot stood up and spake
among them: "Son of Atreus, now deem I that we shall return wandering
home again--if verily we might escape death--if war at once and
pestilence must indeed ravage the Achaians. But come, let us now inquire
of some soothsayer or priest, yea, or an interpreter of dreams--seeing
that a dream too is of Zeus--who shall say wherefore Phoebus Apollo is
so wroth, whether he blame us by reason of vow or hecatomb; if perchance
he would accept the savour of lambs or unblemished goats, and so would
take away the pestilence from us."

So spake he and sate him down; and there stood up before them Kalchas
son of Thestor, most excellent far of augurs, who knew both things that
were and that should be and that had been before, and guided the ships
of the Achaians to Ilios by his soothsaying that Phoebus Apollo bestowed
on him. He of good intent made harangue and spake amid them: "Achilles,
dear to Zeus, thou biddest me tell the wrath of Apollo, the king that
smiteth afar. Therefore will I speak; but do thou make covenant with me,
and swear that verily with all thy heart thou wilt aid me both by word
and deed. For of a truth I deem that I shall provoke one that ruleth all
the Argives with might, and whom the Achaians obey. For a king is more
of might when he is wroth with a meaner man; even though for the one day
he swallow his anger, yet doth he still keep his displeasure thereafter
in his breast till he accomplish it. Consider thou, then, if thou wilt
hold me safe."

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and spake to him: "Yea, be of
good courage, speak whatever soothsaying thou knowest; for by Apollo
dear to Zeus, him by whose worship thou, O Kalchas, declarest thy
soothsaying to the Danaans, not even if thou mean Agamemnon, that now
avoweth him to be greatest far of the Achaians."

Then was the noble seer of good courage, and spake: "Neither by reason
of a vow is he displeased, nor for any hecatomb, but for his priest's
sake to whom Agamemnon did despite, and set not his daughter free and
accepted not the ransom; therefore hath the Far-darter brought woes upon
us, yea, and will bring. Nor will he ever remove the loathly pestilence
from the Danaans till we have given the bright-eyed damsel to her
father, unbought, unransomed, and carried a holy hecatomb to Chryse;
then might we propitiate him to our prayer."

So said he and sate him down, and there stood up before them the hero
son of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon, sore displeased; and his dark
heart within him was greatly filled with anger, and his eyes were like
flashing fire. To Kalchas first spake he with look of ill: "Thou seer of
evil, never yet hast thou told me the thing that is pleasant. Evil is
ever the joy of thy heart to prophesy, but never yet didst thou tell any
good matter nor bring to pass. And now with soothsaying thou makest
harangue among the Danaans, how that the Far-darter bringeth woes upon
them because, forsooth, I would not take the goodly ransom of the damsel
Chryseis, seeing I am the rather fain to keep her own self within mine
house. Yea, I prefer her before Klytaimnestra my wedded wife; in no wise
is she lacking beside her, neither in favour nor stature, nor wit nor
skill. Yet for all this will I give her back, if that is better; rather
would I see my folk whole than perishing. Only make ye me ready a prize
of honour forthwith, lest I alone of all the Argives be disprized, which
thing beseemeth not; for ye all behold how my prize is departing from
me."

To him then made answer fleet-footed goodly Achilles: "Most noble son of
Atreus, of all men most covetous, how shall the great-hearted Achaians
give thee a meed of honour? We know naught of any wealth of common
store, but what spoil soe'er we took from captured cities hath been
apportioned, and it beseemeth not to beg all this back from the folk.
Nay, yield thou the damsel to the god, and we Achaians will pay thee
back threefold and fourfold, if ever Zeus grant us to sack some
well-walled town of Troy-land."

To him lord Agamemnon made answer and said: "Not in this wise, strong as
thou art, O godlike Achilles, beguile thou me by craft; thou shalt not
outwit me nor persuade me. Dost thou wish, that thou mayest keep thy
meed of honour, for me to sit idle in bereavement, and biddest me give
her back? Nay, if the great-hearted Achaians will give me a meed suited
to my mind, that the recompense be equal--but if they give it not, then
I myself will go and take a meed of honour, thine be it or Aias', or
Odysseus' that I will take unto me; wroth shall he be to whomsoever I
come. But for this we will take counsel hereafter; now let us launch a
black ship on the great sea, and gather picked oarsmen, and set therein
a hecatomb, and embark Chryseis of the fair cheeks herself, and let one
of our counsellors be captain, Aias or Idomeneus or goodly Odysseus, or
thou, Peleides, most redoubtable of men, to do sacrifice for us and
propitiate the Far-darter."

Then Achilles fleet of foot looked at him scowling and said: "Ah me,
thou clothed in shamelessness, thou of crafty mind, how shall any
Achaian hearken to thy bidding with all his heart, be it to go a journey
or to fight the foe amain? Not by reason of the Trojan spearmen came I
hither to fight, for they have not wronged me; never did they harry mine
oxen nor my horses, nor ever waste my harvest in deep-soiled Phthia, the
nurse of men; seeing there lieth between us long space of shadowy
mountains and sounding sea; but thee, thou shameless one, followed we
hither to make thee glad, by earning recompense at the Trojans' hands
for Menelaos and for thee, thou dog-face! All this thou threatenest
thyself to take my meed of honour, wherefor I travailed much, and the
sons of the Achaians gave it me. Never win I meed like unto thine, when
the Achaians sack any populous citadel of Trojan men; my hands bear the
brunt of furious war, but when the apportioning cometh then is thy meed
far ampler, and I betake me to the ships with some small thing, yet my
own, when I have fought to weariness. Now will I depart to Phthia,
seeing it is far better to return home on my beaked ships; nor am I
minded here in dishonour to draw thee thy fill of riches and wealth."

Then Agamemnon king of men made answer to him "yea, flee, if thy soul be
set thereon. It is not I that beseech thee to tarry for my sake; I have
others by my side that shall do me honour, and above all Zeus, lord of
counsel. Most hateful art thou to me of all kings, fosterlings of Zeus;
thou ever lovest strife and wars and fightings. Though thou be very
strong, yet that I ween is a gift to thee of God. Go home with thy ships
and company and lord it among thy Myrmidons; I reck not aught of thee
nor care I for thine indignation; and all this shall be my threat to
thee: seeing Phoebus Apollo bereaveth me of Chryseis, her with my ship
and my company will I send back; and mine own self will I go to thy hut
and take Briseis of the fair cheeks, even that thy meed of honour, that
thou mayest well know how far greater I am than thou, and so shall
another hereafter abhor to match his words with mine and rival me to my
face."

So said he, and grief came upon Peleus' son, and his heart within his
shaggy breast was divided in counsel, whether to draw his keen blade
from his thigh and set the company aside and so slay Atreides, or to
assuage his anger and curb his soul. While yet he doubted thereof in
heart and soul, and was drawing his great sword from his sheath, Athene
came to him from heaven, sent forth of the white-armed goddess Hera,
whose heart loved both alike and had care for them. She stood behind
Peleus' son and caught him by his golden hair, to him only visible, and
of the rest no man beheld her. Then Achilles marvelled, and turned him
about, and straightway knew Pallas Athene; and terribly shone her eyes.
He spake to her winged words, and said: "Why now art thou come hither,
thou daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus? Is it to behold the insolence of
Agamemnon, son of Atreus. Yea, I will tell thee that I deem shall even
be brought to pass: by his own haughtinesses shall he soon lose his
life."

Then the bright-eyed goddess Athene spake to him again: "I came from
heaven to stay thine anger, if perchance thou wilt hearken to me, being
sent forth if the white-armed goddess Hera, that loveth you twain alike
and careth for you. Go to now, cease from strife, and let not thine hand
draw the sword; yet with words indeed revile him, even as it shall come
to pass. For thus will I say to thee, and so it shall be fulfilled;
hereafter shall goodly gifts come to thee, yea in threefold measure, by
reason of this despite; hold thou thine hand, and hearken to us."

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and said to her: "Goddess, needs
must a man observe the saying of you twain, even though he be very wroth
at heart; for so is the better way. Whosoever obeyeth the gods, to him
they gladly hearken."

He said, and stayed his heavy hand on the silver hilt, and thrust the
great Sword back into the sheath, and was not disobedient to the saying
of Athene; and she forthwith was departed to Olympus, to the other gods
in the palace of aegis-bearing Zeus.

Then Peleus' son spake again with bitter words to Atreus' son, and in no
wise ceased from anger: "Thou heavy with wine, thou with face of dog and
heart of deer, never didst thou take courage to arm for battle among thy
folk or to lay ambush with the princes of the Achaians; that to thee
were even as death. Far better booteth it, for sooth, to seize for
thyself the meed of honour of every man through the wide host of the
Achaians that speaketh contrary to thee. Folk-devouring king! seeing
thou rulest men of naught; else were this despite, thou son of Atreus,
thy last. But I will speak my word to thee, and swear a mighty oath
therewith: verily by this staff that shall no more put forth leaf or
twig, seeing it hath for ever left its trunk among the hills, neither
shall it grow green again, because the axe hath stripped it of leaves
and bark; and now the sons of the Achaians that exercise judgment bear
it in their hands, even they that by Zeus' command watch over the
traditions--so shall this be a mighty oath in thine eyes--verily shall
longing for Achilles come hereafter upon the sons of the Achaians one
and all; and then wilt thou in no wise avail to save them, for all thy
grief, when multitudes fall dying before manslaying Hector. Then shalt
thou tear thy heart within thee for anger that thou didst in no wise
honour the best of the Achaians."

So said Peleides and dashed to earth the staff studded with golden
nails, and himself sat down; and over against him Atreides waxed
furious. Then in their midst rose up Nestor, pleasant of speech, the
clear-voiced orator of the Pylians, he from whose tongue flowed
discourse sweeter than honey. Two generations of mortal men already had
he seen perish, that had been of old time born and nurtured with him in
goodly Pylos, and he was king among the third. He of good intent made
harangue to them and said: "Alas, of a truth sore lamentation cometh
upon the land of Achaia. Verily Priam would be glad and Priam's sons,
and all the Trojans would have great joy of heart, were they to hear all
this tale of strife between you twain that are chiefest of the Danaans
in counsel and chiefest in battle. Nay, hearken to me; ye are younger
both than I. Of old days held I converse with better men even than you,
and never did they make light of me. Yea, I never beheld such warriors,
nor shall behold, as were Peirithoos and Dryas shepherd of the host and
Kaineus and Exadios and godlike Polyphemos [and Theseus son of Aigeus,
like to the Immortals]. Mightiest of growth were they of all men upon
the earth; mightiest they were and with the mightiest fought they, even
the wild tribes of the Mountain caves, and destroyed them utterly. And
with these held I converse, being come from Pylos, from a distant land
afar; for of themselves they summoned me. So I played my part in fight;
and with them could none of men that are now on earth do battle. And
they laid to heart my counsels and hearkened to my voice. Even so
hearken ye also, for better is it to hearken. Neither do thou, though
thou art very great, seize from him his damsel, but leave her as she was
given at the first by the sons of the Achaians to be a meed of honour;
nor do thou, son of Peleus, think to strive with a king, might against
might; seeing that no common honour pertaineth to a sceptred king to
whom Zeus apportioneth glory. Though thou be strong, and a goddess
mother bare thee, yet his is the greater place, for he is king over
more. And thou, Atreides, abate thy fury; nay, it is even I that beseech
thee to let go thine anger with Achilles, who is made unto all the
Achaians a mighty bulwark of evil war."

Then lord Agamemnon answered and said: "Yea verily, old man, all this
thou sayest is according unto right. But this fellow would be above all
others, he would be lord of all and king among all and captain to all;
wherein I deem none will hearken to him. Though the immortal gods made
him a spearman, do they therefore put revilings in his mouth for him to
utter?"

Then goodly Achilles brake in on him and answered: "Yea, for I should be
called coward and man of naught, if I yield to thee in every matter,
howsoe'er thou bid. To others give now thine orders, not to me [play
master; for thee I deem that I shall no more obey]. This, moreover, will
I say to thee, and do thou lay it to thy heart. Know that not by
violence will I strive for the damsel's sake, neither with thee nor any
other; ye gave and ye have taken away. But of all else that is mine
beside my fleet black ship, thereof shalt thou not take anything or bear
it away against my will. Yea, go to now, make trial, that all these may
see; forthwith thy dark blood shall gush about my spear."

Now when the twain had thus finished the battle of violent words, they
stood up and dissolved the assembly beside the Achaian ships. Peleides
went his way to his huts and trim ships with Menoitios' son [Patroklos]
and his company; and Atreides launched a fleet ship on the sea, and
picked twenty oarsmen therefor, and embarked the hecatomb for the god,
and brought Chryseis of the fair cheeks and set her therein; and
Odysseus of many devices went to be their captain.

So these embarked and sailed over the wet ways; and Atreides bade the
folk purify themselves. So they purified themselves, and cast the
defilements into the sea and did sacrifice to Apollo, even unblemished
hecatombs of bulls and goats, along the shore of the unvintaged sea; and
the sweet savour arose to heaven eddying amid the smoke.

Thus were they busied throughout the host; but Agamemnon ceased not from
the strife wherewith he threatened Achilles at the first; he spake to
Talthybios and Eurybates that were his heralds and nimble squires: "Go
ye to the tent of Achilles Peleus' son, and take Briseis of the fair
cheeks by the hand and lead her hither; and if he give her not, then
will I myself go, and more with me, and seize her; and that will be yet
more grievous for him."

So saying he sent them forth, and laid stern charge upon them.
Unwillingly went they along the beach of the unvintaged sea, and came to
the huts and ships of the Myrmidons. Him found they sitting beside his
hut and black ship; nor when he saw them was Achilles glad. So they in
dread and reverence of the king stood, and spake to him no word, nor
questioned him. But he knew in his heart, and spake to them: "All hail,
ye heralds, messengers of Zeus and men, come near; ye are not guilty in
my sight, but Agamemnon that sent you for the sake of the damsel
Briseis. Go now, heaven-sprung Patroklos, bring forth the damsel, and
give them her to lead away. Moreover, let the twain themselves be my
witnesses before the face of the blessed gods and mortal men, yea and of
him, that king untoward, against the day when there cometh need of me
hereafter to save them all from shameful wreck. Of a truth he raveth
with baleful mind, and hath not knowledge to look before and after, that
so his Achaians might battle in safety beside their ships."

So said he, and Patroklos hearkened to his dear comrade, and led forth
from the hut Briseis of the fair cheeks, and gave them her to lead away.
So these twain took their way back along the Achaians' ships, and with
them went the woman all unwilling. Then Achilles wept anon, and sat him
down apart, aloof from his comrades on the beach of the grey sea, gazing
across the boundless main; he stretched forth his hands and prayed
instantly to his dear mother: "Mother, seeing thou didst of a truth bear
me to so brief span of life, honour at the least ought the Olympian to
have granted me, even Zeus that thundereth on high; but now doth he not
honour me, no, not one whit. Verily Atreus' son, wide-ruling Agamemnon,
hath done me dishonour; for he hath taken away my meed of honour and
keepeth her of his own violent deed."

So spake he weeping, and his lady mother heard him as she sate in the
sea-depths beside her aged sire. With speed arose she from the grey sea,
like a mist, and sate her before the face of her weeping son, and
stroked him with her hand, and spake and called on his name: "My child,
why weepest thou? What sorrow hath entered into they heart? Speak it
forth, hide it not in thy mind, that both may know it."

Then with heavy moan Achilles fleet of foot spake to her: "Thou knowest
it; why should I tell this to thee that knowest all! We had fared to
Thebe, the holy city of Eetion, and laid it waste and carried hither all
the spoils. So the sons of the Achaians divided among them all aright;
and for Atreides they set apart Chryseis of the fair cheeks. But
Chryses, priest of Apollo the Far-darter, came unto the fleet ships of
the mail-clad Achaians to win his daughter's freedom, and brought a
ransom beyond telling, and bare in his hands the fillet of Apollo the
Far-darter upon a golden staff, and made his prayer unto all the
Achaians, and most of all to the two sons of Atreus, orderers of the
host. Then all the other Achaians cried assent, to reverence the priest
and accept his goodly ransom; yet the thing pleased not the heart of
Agamemnon son of Atreus, but he roughly sent him away and laid stern
charge upon him. So the old man went back in anger; and Apollo heard his
prayers, seeing he loved him greatly, and he aimed against the Argives
his deadly darts. So the people began to perish in multitudes, and the
god's shafts ranged everywhither throughout the wide host of the
Achaians. Then of full knowledge the seer declared to us the oracle of
the Far-darter. Forthwith I first bade propitiate the god; but wrath gat
hold upon Atreus' son thereat, and anon he stood up and spake a
threatening word, that hath now been accomplished. Her the glancing-eyed
Achaians are bringing on their fleet ship to Chryse, and bear with
them offerings to the king; and the other but now the heralds went and
took from my hut, even the daughter of Briseus, whom the sons of the
Achaians gave me. Thou therefore, if indeed thou canst, guard thine own
son; betake thee to Olympus and beseech Zeus by any word whereby thou
ever didst make glad his heart. For oft have I heard thee proclaiming in
my father's halls and telling that thou alone amid the immortals didst
save the son of Kronos, lord of the storm-cloud, from shameful wreck,
when all the other Olympians would have bound him, even Hera and
Poseidon and Pallas Athene. Then didst thou, O goddess, enter in and
loose him from his bonds, having with speed summoned to high Olympus him
of the hundred arms whom gods call Briareus, but all men call Aigaion;
for he is mightier even than his father--so he sate him by Kronion's
side rejoicing in his triumph, and the blessed gods feared him withal
and bound not Zeus. This bring thou to his remembrance and sit by him
and clasp his knees, if perchance he will give succour to the Trojans;
and for the Achaians, hem them among their ships' sterns about the bay,
given over to slaughter; that they may make trial of their king, and
that even Atreides, wide-ruling Agamemnon, may perceive his blindness,
in that he honoured not at all the best of the Achaians."

Then Thetis weeping made answer to him: "Ah me, my child, why reared I
thee, cursed in my motherhood? Would thou hadst been left tearless and
griefless amid the ships, seeing thy lot is very brief and endureth no
long while; but now art thou made short-lived alike and lamentable
beyond all men; in an evil hour I bare thee in our halls. But I will go
myself to snow-clad Olympus to tell this thy saying to Zeus, whose joy
is in the thunder, [perhaps rather, "hurler of the thunderbolt."] if
perchance he may hearken to me. But tarry thou now amid thy fleet-faring
ships, and continue wroth with the Achaians, and refrain utterly from
battle: for Zeus went yesterday to Okeanos, unto the noble Ethiopians
for a feast, and all the gods followed with him; but on the twelfth day
will he return to Olympus, and then will I fare to Zeus' palace of the
bronze threshold, and will kneel to him and think to win him."

So saying she went her way and left him there, vexed in spirit for the
fair-girdled woman's sake, whom they had taken perforce despite his
will: and meanwhile Odysseus came to Chryse with the holy hecatomb. When
they were now entered within the deep haven, they furled their sails and
laid them in the black ship, and lowered the mast by the forestays and
brought it to the crutch with speed, and rowed her with oars to the
anchorage. Then they cast out the mooring stones and made fast the
hawsers, and so themselves went forth on to the sea-beach, and forth
they brought the hecatomb for the Far-darter Apollo, and forth came
Chryseis withal from the seafaring ship. Then Odysseus of many counsels
brought her to the altar and gave her into her father's arms, and spake
unto him: "Chryses, Agamemnon king of men sent me hither to bring thee
thy daughter, and to offer to Phoebus a holy hecatomb on the Danaans'
behalf, wherewith to propitiate the king that hath now brought sorrow
and lamentation on the Argives."

So saying he gave her to his arms, and he gladly took his dear child;
and anon they set in order for the god the holy hecatomb about his
well-builded altar; next washed they their hands and took up the barley
meal. Then Chryses lifted up his hands and prayed aloud for them:
"Hearken to me, god of the silver bow that standest over Chryse and holy
Killa, and rulest Tenedos with might; even as erst thou heardest my
prayer, and didst me honour, and mightily afflictest the people of the
Achaians, even so now fulfil me this my desire: remove thou from the
Danaans forthwith the loathly pestilence."

So spake he in prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him. Now when they had
prayed and sprinkled the barley meal, first they drew back the victims'
heads and slaughtered them and flayed them, and cut slices from the
thighs and wrapped them in fat, making a double fold, and laid raw
collops thereon, and the old man burnt them on cleft wood and made
libation over them of gleaming wine; and at his side the young men in
their hands held five-pronged forks. Now when the thighs were burnt and
they had tasted the vitals, then sliced they all the rest and pierced it
through with spits, and roasted it carefully, and drew all off again. So
when they had rest from the task and had made ready the banquet, they
feasted, nor was their heart aught stinted of the fair banquet. But when
they had put away from them the desire of meat and drink, the young men
crowned the bowls with wine, and gave each man his portion after the
drink-offering had been poured into the cups. So all day long worshipped
they the god with music, singing the beautiful paean, the sons of the
Achaians making music to the Far-darter [or, "the Averter" (of
pestilence)]; and his heart was glad to hear. And when the sun went down
and darkness came on them, they laid them to sleep beside the ship's
hawsers; and when rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, the child of morning,
then set they sail for the wide camp of the Achaians; and Apollo the
Far-darter sent them a favouring gale. They set up their mast and spread
the white sails forth, and the wind filled the sail's belly and the dark
wave sang loud about the stem as the ship made way, and she sped across
the wave, accomplishing her journey. So when they were now come to the
wide camp of the Achaians, they drew up their black ship to land high
upon the sands, and set in line the long props beneath her; and
themselves were scattered amid their huts and ships.

But he sat by his swift-faring ships, still wroth, even the heaven-sprung
son of Peleus, Achilles fleet of foot; he betook him neither to the
assembly that is the hero's glory, neither to war, but consumed his
heart in tarrying in his place, and yearned for the war-cry and for
battle.

Now when the twelfth morn thereafter was come, then the gods that are
for ever fared to Olympus all in company, led of Zeus. And Thetis forgat
not her son's charge, but rose up from the sea-wave, and at early morn
mounted up to great heaven and Olympus. There found she Kronos' son of
the far-sounding voice sitting apart from all on the topmost peak of
many-ridged Olympus. So she sat before his face and with her left hand
clasped his knees, and with her right touched him beneath his chin, and
spake in prayer to king Zeus son of Kronos: "Father Zeus, if ever I gave
thee aid amid the immortal gods, whether by word or deed, fulfil thou
this my desire: do honour to my son, that is doomed to earliest death of
all men: now hath Agamemnon king of men done him dishonour, for he hath
taken away his meed of honour and keepeth her of his own violent deed.
But honour thou him, Zeus of Olympus, lord of counsel; grant thou
victory to the Trojans the while until the Achaians do my son honour and
exalt him with recompense."

So spake she; but Zeus the cloud-gatherer said no word to her, and sat
long time in silence. But even as Thetis had clasped his knees, so held
she by him clinging, and questioned him yet a second time: "Promise me
now this thing verily, and bow thy head thereto; or else deny me, seeing
there is naught for thee to fear; that I may know full well how I among
all gods am least in honour."

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer, sore troubled, spake to her: "Verily it is
a sorry matter, if thou wilt set me at variance with Hera, whene'er she
provoketh me with taunting words. Even now she upbraideth me ever amid
the immortal gods, and saith that I aid the Trojans in battle. But do
thou now depart again, lest Hera mark aught; and I will take thought for
these things to fulfil them. Come now, I will bow my head to thee, that
thou mayest be of good courage; for that, of my part, is the surest
token amid the immortals; no word of mine is revocable nor false nor
unfulfilled when the bowing of my head hath pledged it."

Kronion spake, and bowed his dark brow, and the ambrosial locks waved
from the king's immortal head; and he made great Olympus quake.

Thus the twain took counsel and parted; she leapt therewith into the
deep sea from glittering Olympus, and Zeus fared to his own palace. All
the gods in company arose from their seats before their father's face;
neither ventured any to await his coming, but stood up all before him.
So he sate him there upon his throne; but Hera saw, and was not ignorant
how that the daughter of the Ancient of the sea, Thetis the
silver-footed, had devised counsel with him. Anon with taunting words
spake she to Zeus the son of Kronos: "Now who among the gods, thou
crafty of mind, hath devised counsel with thee? It is ever thy good
pleasure to hold aloof from me and in secret meditation to give thy
judgments, nor of thine own good will hast thou ever brought thyself to
declare unto me the thing thou purposest."

Then the father of gods and men made answer her: "Hera, think not thou
to know all my sayings; hard they are for thee, even though thou art my
wife. But whichsoever it is seemly for thee to hear, none sooner than
thou shall know, be he god or man. Only when I will to take thought
aloof from the gods, then do not thou ask of every matter nor make
question."

Then Hera the ox-eyed queen made answer to him. "Most dread son of
Kronos, what word is this thou hast spoken? Yea, surely of old I have
not asked thee nor made question, but in my heart sore afraid lest thou
have been won over by silver-footed Thetis, daughter of the Ancient of
the sea, for she at early morn sat by thee and clasped thy knees. To her
I deem thou gavest a sure pledge that thou wilt do honour to Achilles,
and lay many low beside the Achaians' ships."

To her made answer Zeus the cloud-gatherer: "Lady, Good lack! ever art
thou imagining, nor can I escape thee; yet shalt thou in no wise have
power to fulfil, but wilt be the further from my heart; that shall be
even the worse for thee. And if it be so, then such must my good
pleasure be. Abide thou in silence and hearken to my bidding, lest all
the gods that are in Olympus keep not off from thee my visitation, when
I put forth my hands unapproachable against thee."

He said, and Hera the ox-eyed queen was afraid, and sat in silence,
curbing her heart; but throughout Zeus' palace the gods of heaven were
troubled. Then Hephaistos the famed craftsman began to make harangue
among them, to do kindness to his mother, white-armed Hera: "Verily this
will be a sorry matter, neither any more endurable, if ye twain thus
fight for mortals' sakes, and bring wrangling among the gods; neither
will there any more be joy of the goodly feast, seeing that evil
triumpheth. So I give counsel to my mother, though herself is wise, to
do kindness to our dear father Zeus, that our father upbraid us not
again and cast the banquet in confusion. What if the Olympian, the lord
of the lightning, will to dash us from our seats! for he is strongest
far. Nay, approach thou him with gentle words, then will the Olympian
forthwith be gracious unto us."

So speaking he rose up and sat in his dear mother's hand the twy-handled
cup, and spake to her: "Be of good courage, mother mine, and endure,
though thou art vexed, lest I behold thee, thou art so dear, chastised
before mine eyes, and then shall I not be able for all my sorrow to save
thee; for the Olympian is a hard foe to face. Yea, once ere this, when I
was fain to save thee, he caught me by my foot and hurled me from the
heavenly threshold; all day I flew, and at the set of sun I fell in
Lemnos, and little life was in me. There did the Sintian folk forthwith
tend me for my fall."

He spake, and the white-armed goddess Hera smiled, and smiling took the
cup at her son's hand. Then he poured wine to all the other gods from
right to left, ladling the sweet nectar from the bowl. And laughter
unquenchable arose amid the blessed gods to see Hephaistos bustling
through the palace.

So feasted they all day till the setting of the sun; nor was their soul
aught stinted of the fair banquet, nor of the beauteous lyre that Apollo
held, and the Muses singing alternately with sweet voice.

Now when the bright light of the sun was set, these went each to his own
house to sleep, where each one had his palace made with cunning device
by famed Hephaistos the lame god; and Zeus the Olympian, the lord of
lightning, departed to his couch where he was wont of old to take his
rest, whenever sweet sleep visited him. There went he up and slept, and
beside him was Hera of the golden throne.



BOOK II.

    How Zeus beguiled Agamemnon by a dream; and of the assembly
    of the Achaians and their marching forth to battle. And of
    the names and numbers of the hosts of the Achaians and the
    Trojans.

Now all other gods and chariot-driving men slept all night long, only
Zeus was not holden of sweet sleep; rather was he pondering in his heart
how he should do honour to Achilles and destroy many beside the
Achaians' ships. And this design seemed to his mind the best, to wit, to
send a baneful dream upon Agamemnon son of Atreus. So he spake, and
uttered to him winged words: "Come now, thou baneful Dream, go to the
Achaians' fleet ships, enter into the hut of Agamemnon son of Atreus,
and tell him every word plainly as I charge thee. Bid him call to arms
the flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now he may take the
wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that dwell in the
halls of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath
turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the Trojans sorrows
hang."

So spake he, and the Dream went his way when he had heard the charge.
With speed he came to the Achaians' fleet ships, and went to Agamemnon
son of Atreus, and found him sleeping in his hut, and ambrosial slumber
poured over him. So he stood over his head in seeming like unto the son
of Neleus, even Nestor, whom most of all the elders Agamemnon honoured;
in his likeness spake to him the heavenly Dream:

"Sleepest thou, son of wise Atreus tamer of horses? To sleep all night
through beseemeth not one that is a counsellor, to whom peoples are
entrusted and so many cares belong. But now hearken straightway to me,
for I am a messenger to thee from Zeus, who though he be afar yet hath
great care for thee and pity. He biddeth thee call to arms the
flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now thou mayest take
the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that dwell in the
halls of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath
turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the Trojans sorrows
hang by the will of Zeus. But do thou keep this in thy heart, not let
forgetfulness come upon thee when honeyed sleep shall leave thee."

So spake the Dream, and departed and left him there, deeming in his mind
things that were not to be fulfilled. For indeed he thought to take
Priam's city that very day; fond man, in that he knew not the plans that
Zeus had in mind, who was willed to bring yet more grief and wailing on
Trojans alike and Danaans throughout the course of stubborn fights. Then
woke he from sleep, and the heavenly voice was in his ears. So he rose
up sitting, and donned his soft tunic, fair and bright, and cast around
him his great cloak, and beneath his glistering feet he bound his fair
sandals, and over his shoulders cast his silver-studded sword, and
grasped his sires' sceptre, imperishable for ever, wherewith he took his
way amid the mail-clad Achaians' ships.

Now went the goddess Dawn to high Olympus, foretelling daylight to Zeus
and all the immortals; and the king bade the clear-voiced heralds summon
to the assembly the flowing-haired Achaians. So did those summon, and
these gathered with speed.

But first the council of the great-hearted elders met beside the ship of
king Nestor the Pylos-born. And he that had assembled them framed his
cunning counsel: "Hearken, my friends. A dream from heaven came to me in
my sleep through the ambrosial night, and chiefly to goodly Nestor was
very like in shape and bulk and stature. And it stood over my head and
charged me saying: 'Sleepest thou, son of wise Atreus tamer of horses?
To sleep all night through beseemeth not one that is a counsellor, to
whom peoples are entrusted and so many cares belong. But now hearken
straightway to me, for I am a messenger to thee from Zeus, who though he
be afar yet hath great care for thee and pity. He biddeth thee call to
arms the flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now thou
mayest take the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that
dwell in the palaces of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since
Hera hath turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the
Trojans sorrows hang by the will of Zeus. But do thou keep this in thy
heart.' So spake the dream and was flown away, and sweet sleep left me.
So come, let us now call to arms as we may the sons of the Achaians. But
first I will speak to make trial of them as is fitting, and bid them
flee with their benched ships; only do ye from this side and from that
speak to hold them back."

So spake he and sate him down; and there stood up among them Nestor, who
was king of sandy Pylos. He of good intent made harangue to them and
said: "My friends, captains and rulers of the Argives, had any other of
the Achaians told us this dream we might deem it a false thing, and
rather turn away therefrom; but now he hath seen it who of all Achaians
avoweth himself far greatest. So come, let us call to arms as we may the
sons of the Achaians."

So spake he, and led the way forth from the council, and all the other
sceptred chiefs rose with him and obeyed the shepherd of the host; and
the people hastened to them. Even as when the tribes of thronging bees
issue from the hollow rock, ever in fresh procession, and fly clustering
among the flowers of spring, and some on this hand and some on that fly
thick; even so from ships and huts before the low beach marched forth
their many tribes by companies to the place of assembly. And in their
midst blazed forth Rumour, messenger of Zeus, urging them to go; and so
they gathered. And the place of assemblage was in an uproar, and the
earth echoed again as the hosts sate them down, and there was turmoil.
Nine heralds restrained them with shouting, if perchance they might
refrain from clamour, and hearken to their kings, the fosterlings of
Zeus. And hardly at the last would the people sit, and keep them to
their benches and cease from noise. Then stood up lord Agamemnon bearing
his sceptre, that Hephaistos had wrought curiously. Hephaistos gave it
to king Zeus son of Kronos, and then Zeus gave it to the messenger-god
the slayer of Argus [Or, possibly, "the swift-appearing"]; and king
Hermes gave it to Pelops the charioteer, and Pelops again gave it to
Atreus shepherd of the host. And Atreus dying left it to Thyestes rich
in flocks, and Thyestes in his turn left it to Agamemnon to bear, that
over many islands and all Argos he should be lord. Thereon he leaned and
spake his saying to the Argives:

"My friends, Danaan warriors, men of Ares' company, Zeus Kronos' son
hath bound me with might in grievous blindness of soul; hard of heart is
he, for that erewhile he promised me and pledged his nod that not till I
had wasted well-walled Ilios should I return; but now see I that he
planned a cruel wile and biddeth me return to Argos dishonoured, with
the loss of many of my folk. So meseems it pleaseth most mighty Zeus,
who hath laid low the head of many a city, yea, and shall lay low; for
his is highest power. Shame is this even for them that come after to
hear; how so goodly and great a folk of the Achaians thus vainly warred
a bootless war, and fought scantier enemies, and no end thereof is yet
seen. For if perchance we were minded, both Achaians and Trojans, to
swear a solemn truce, and to number ourselves, and if the Trojans should
gather together all that have their dwellings in the city, and we
Achaians should marshal ourselves by tens, and every company choose a
Trojan to pour their wine, then would many tens lack a cup-bearer: so
much, I say, do the sons of the Achaians outnumber the Trojans that
dwell within the city. But allies from many cities, even warriors that
wield the spear, are therein, and they hinder me perforce, and for all
my will suffer me not to waste the populous citadel of Ilios. Already
have nine years of great Zeus passed away, and our ships' timbers have
rotted and the tackling is loosed; while there our wives and little
children sit in our halls awaiting us; yet is our task utterly
unaccomplished wherefor we came hither. So come, even as I bid let us
all obey. Let us flee with our ships to our dear native land; for now
shall we never take wide-wayed Troy."

So spake he, and stirred the spirit in the breasts of all throughout the
multitude, as many as had not heard the council. And the assembly swayed
like high sea-waves of the Icarian Main that east wind and south wind
raise, rushing upon them from the clouds of father Zeus; and even as
when the west wind cometh to stir a deep cornfield with violent blast,
and the ears bow down, so was all the assembly stirred, and they with
shouting hasted toward the ships; and the dust from beneath their feet
rose and stood on high. And they bade each man his neighbor to seize the
ships and drag them into the bright salt sea, and cleared out the
launching-ways, and the noise went up to heaven of their hurrying
homewards; and they began to take the props from beneath the ships.

Then would the Argives have accomplished their return against the will
of fate, but that Hera spake a word to Athene: "Out on it, daughter of
aegis-bearing Zeus, unwearied maiden! Shall the Argives thus indeed flee
homeward to their dear native land over the sea's broad back? But they
would leave to Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Helen of Argos,
for whose sake many an Achaian hath perished in Troy, far away from his
dear native land. But go thou now amid the host of the mail-clad
Achaians; with thy gentle words refrain thou every man, neither suffer
them to draw their curved ships down to the salt sea."

So spake she, and the bright-eyed goddess Athene disregarded not; but
went darting down from the peaks of Olympus, and came with speed to the
fleet ships of the Achaians. There found she Odysseus standing, peer of
Zeus in counsel, neither laid he any hand upon his decked black ship,
because grief had entered into his heart and soul. And bright-eyed
Athene stood by him and said: "Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus of
many devices, will ye indeed fling yourselves upon your benched ships to
flee homeward to your dear native land? But ye would leave to Priam and
the Trojans their boast, even Helen of Argos, for whose sake many an
Achaian hath perished in Troy, far from his dear native land. But go
thou now amid the host of the Achaians, and tarry not; and with gentle
words refrain every man, neither suffer them to draw their curved ships
down to the salt sea."

So said she, and he knew the voice of the goddess speaking to him, and
set him to run, and cast away his mantle, the which his herald gathered
up, even Eurybated of Ithaca, that waited on him. And himself he went to
meet Agamemnon son of Atreus, and at his hand received the sceptre of
his sires, imperishable for ever, wherewith he took his way amid the
ships of the mail-clad Achaians.

Whenever he found one that was a captain and a man of mark, he stood by
his side, and refrained him with gentle words: "Good sir, it is not
seemly to affright thee like a coward, but do thou sit thyself and make
all thy folk sit down. For thou knowest not yet clearly what is the
purpose of Atreus' son; now is he but making trial, and soon he will
afflict the sons of the Achaians. And heard we not all of us what he
spake in the council? Beware lest in his anger he evilly entreat the
sons of the Achaians. For proud is the soul of heaven-fostered kings;
because their honour is of Zeus, and the god of counsel loveth them."

But whatever man of the people he saw and found him shouting, him he
drave with his sceptre and chode him with loud words: "Good sir, sit
still and hearken to the words of others that are thy betters; but thou
art no warrior, and a weakling, never reckoned whether in battle or in
council. In no wise can we Achaians all be kings here. A multitude of
masters is no good thing; let there be one master, one king, to whom the
son of crooked-counselling Kronos hath granted it, [even the sceptre and
judgments, that he may rule among you"].

So masterfully ranged he the host; and they hasted back to the assembly
from ships and huts, with noise as when a wave of loud-sounding sea
roareth on the long beach and the main resoundeth.

Now all the rest sat down and kept their place upon the benches, only
Thersites still chattered on, the uncontrolled speech, whose mind was
full of words many and disorderly, wherewith to strive against the
chiefs idly and in no good order, but even as he deemed that he should
make the Argives laugh. And he was ill-favored beyond all men that came
to Ilios. Bandy-legged was he, and lame of one foot, and his two
shoulders rounded, arched down upon his chest; and over them his head
was warped, and a scanty stubble sprouted on it. Hateful was he to
Achilles above all and to Odysseus, for them he was wont to revile. But
now with shrill shout he poured forth his upbraidings upon goodly
Agamemnon. With him the Achaians were sore vexed and had indignation in
their souls. But he with loud shout spake and reviled Agamemnon:
"Atreides, for what art thou now ill content and lacking? Surely thy
huts are full of bronze and many women are in they huts, the chosen
spoils that we Achaians give thee first of all, whene'er we take a town.
Can it be that thou yet wantest gold as well, such as some one of the
horse-taming Trojans may bring from Ilios to ransom his son, whom I
perchance or some other Achaian have led captive; or else some young
girl, to know in love, whom thou mayest keep apart to thyself? But it is
not seemly for one that is their captain to bring the sons of the
Achaians to ill. Soft fools, base things of shame, ye women of Achaia
and men no more, let us depart home with our ships, and leave this
fellow here in Troy-land to gorge him with meeds of honour, that he may
see whether our aid avail him aught or no; even he that hath now done
dishonour to Achilles, a far better man than he; for he hath taken away
his meed of honour and keepeth it by his own violent deed. Of a very
surety is there no wrath at all in Achilles' mind, but he is slack; else
this despite, thou son of Atreus, were thy last."

So spake Thersites, reviling Agamemnon shepherd of the host. But goodly
Odysseus came straight to his side, and looking sternly at him with hard
words rebuked him: "Thersites, reckless in words, shrill orator though
thou art, refrain thyself, nor aim to strive singly against kings. For I
deem that no mortal is baser than thou of all that with the sons of
Atreus came before Ilios. Therefore were it well that thou shouldest not
have kings in thy mouth as thou talkest, and utter revilings against
them and be on the watch for departure. We know not yet clearly how
these things shall be, whether we sons of the Achaians shall return for
good or ill. Therefore now dost thou revile continually Agamemnon son of
Atreus, shepherd of the host, because the Danaan warriors give him many
gifts, and so thou talkest tauntingly. But I will tell thee plain, and
that I say shall even be brought to pass: if I find thee again raving as
now thou art, then may Odysseus' head no longer abide upon his
shoulders, nor may I any more be called father of Telemachos, if I take
thee not and strip from thee thy garments, thy mantle and tunic that
cover thy nakedness, and for thyself send thee weeping to the fleet
ships, and beat thee out of the assembly with shameful blows."

So spake he, and with his staff smote his back and shoulders: and he
bowed down and a big tear fell from him, and a bloody weal stood up from
his back beneath the golden sceptre. Then he sat down and was amazed,
and in pain with helpless look wiped away the tear. But the rest, though
they were sotty, laughed lightly at him, and thus would one speak
looking at another standing by: "Go to, of a truth Odysseus hath wrought
good deeds without number ere now, standing foremost in wise counsels
and setting battle in array, but now is this thing the best by far that
he hath wrought among the Argives, to wit, that he hath stayed this
prating railer from his harangues. Never again, forsooth, will his proud
soul henceforth bid him revile the kings with slanderous words."

So said the common sort; but up rose Odysseus waster of cities, with
sceptre in his hand. And by his side bright-eyed Athene in the likeness
of a herald bade the multitude keep silence, that the sons of the
Achaians, both the nearest and the farthest, might hear his words
together and give heed to his counsel. He of good intent made harangue
to them and said: "Atreides, now surely are the Achaians for making
thee, O king, most despised among all mortal men, nor will they fulfil
the promise that they pledged thee when they still were marching hither
from horse-pasturing Argos; that thou shouldest not return till thou
hadst laid well-walled Ilios waste. For like young children or widow
women do they wail each to the other of returning home. Yea, here is
toil to make a man depart disheartened. For he that stayeth away but one
single month far from his wife in his benched ship fretteth himself when
winter storms and the furious sea imprison him; but for us, the ninth
year of our stay here is upon us in its course. Therefore do I not
marvel that the Achaians should fret beside their beaked ships; yet
nevertheless is it shameful to wait long and to depart empty. Be of good
heart, my friends, and wait a while, until we learn whether Kalchas be a
true prophet or no. For this thing verily we know well in our hearts,
and ye all are witnesses thereof, even as many as the fates of death
have not borne away. It was as it were but yesterday or the day before
that the Achaians' ships were gathering in Aulis, freighted with trouble
for Priam and the Trojans; and we round about a spring were offering on
the holy altars unblemished hecatombs to the immortals, beneath a fair
plane-tree whence flowed bright water, when there was seen a great
portent: a snake blood-red on the back, terrible, whom the god of
Olympus himself had sent forth to the light of day, sprang from beneath
the altar and darted to the plane-tree. Now there were there the brood
of a sparrow, tender little ones, upon the topmost branch, nestling
beneath the leaves; eight were they and the mother of the little ones
was the ninth, and the snake swallowed these cheeping pitifully. And the
mother fluttered around wailing for her dear little ones; but he coiled
himself and caught her by the wing as she screamed about him. Now when
he had swallowed the sparrow's little ones and the mother with them, the
god who revealed him made of him a sign; for the son of
crooked-counselling Kronos turned him to stone, and we stood by and
marvelled to see what was done. So when the dread portent brake in upon
the hecatombs of the gods, then did Kalchas forthwith prophesy, and
said: 'Why hold ye your peace, ye flowing-haired Achaians? To us hath
Zeus the counsellor shown this great sign, late come, of late
fulfilment, the fame whereof shall never perish. Even as he swallowed
the sparrow's little ones and herself, the eight wherewith the mother
that bare the little ones was the ninth, so shall we war there so many
years, but in the tenth year shall we take the wide-wayed city.' So
spake the seer; and now are all these things being fulfilled. So come,
abide ye all, ye well-greaved Achaians, even where ye are, until we have
taken the great city of Priam."

So spake he, and the Argives shouted aloud, and all round the ships
echoed terribly to the voice of the Achaians as they praised the saying
of god-like Odysseus. And then spake among them knightly Nestor of
Gerenia: "Out on it; in very truth ye hold assembly like silly boys that
have no care for deeds of war. What shall come of our covenants and our
oaths? Let all counsels be cast into the fire and all devices of
warriors and the pure drink-offerings and the right hands of fellowship
wherein we trusted. For we are vainly striving with words nor can we
find any device at all, for all our long tarrying here. Son of Atreus,
do thou still, as erst, keep steadfast purpose and lead the Argives amid
the violent fray; and for these, let them perish, the one or two
Achaians that take secret counsel--to depart to Argos first, before they
know whether the promise of aegis-bearing Zeus be a lie or no. Yea, for
I say that most mighty Kronion pledged us his word that day when the
Argives embarked upon their fleet ships, bearing unto the Trojans death
and fate; for by his lightning upon our right he manifested signs of
good. Therefore let Trojan's wife and paid back his strivings and groans
for Helen's sake. But if any man is overmuch desirous to depart homewards,
let him lay his hand upon his decked black ship, that before all men he
may encounter death and fate. But do thou, my king, take good counsel
thyself, and whate'er it be, shall not be cast away. Separate thy
warriors by tribes and by clans, Agamemnon, that clan may give aid to
clan and tribe to tribe. If thou do thus and the Achaians hearken to
thee, then wilt thou know who among thy captains and who of the common
sort is a coward, and who too is brave; for they will fight each after
their sort. So wilt thou know whether it is even by divine command that
thou shalt not take the city, or by the baseness of thy warriors and
their ill skill in battle."

And lord Agamemnon answered and said to him: "Verily hast thou again
outdone the sons of the Achaians in speech, old man. Ah, father Zeus and
Athene and Apollo, would that among the Achaians I had ten such
councillors; then would the city of king Priam soon bow beneath our
hands, captive and wasted. But aegis-bearing Zeus, the son of Kronos,
hath brought sorrows upon me, in that he casteth my lot amid fruitless
wranglings and strifes. For in truth I and Achilles fought about a
damsel with violent words, and I was first to be angry; but if we can
only be at one in council, then will there no more be any putting off
the day of evil for the Trojans, no not for an instant. But now go ye to
your meal that we may join battle. Let each man sharpen well his spear
and bestow well his shield, and let him well give his fleet-footed
steeds their meal, and look well to his chariot on every side and take
thought for battle, that all day long we may contend in hateful war. For
of respite shall there intervene no, not a whit, only that the coming of
night shall part the fury of warriors. On each man's breast shall the
baldrick of his covering shield be wet with sweat, and his hand shall
grow faint about the spear, and each man's horse shall sweat as he
draweth the polished chariot. And whomsoever I perceive minded to tarry
far from the fight beside the beaked ships, for him shall there be no
hope hereafter to escape the dogs and birds of prey."

So spake he, and the Argives shouted aloud, like to a wave on a steep
shore, when the south wind cometh and stirreth it; even on a jutting
rock, that is never left at peace by the waves of all winds that rise
from this side and from that. And they did sacrifice each man to one of
the everlasting gods, praying for escape from death and the tumult of
battle. But Agamemnon king of men slew a fat bull of five years to most
mighty Kronion, and called the elders, the princes of the Achaian host,
Nestor first and king Idomeneus, and then the two Aiantes and Tydeus'
son, and sixthly Odysseus peer of Zeus in counsel. And Menelaos of the
loud war-cry came to him unbidden, for he knew in his heart how his
brother toiled. Then stood they around the bull and took the
barley-meal. And Agamemnon made his prayer in their midst and said:
"Zeus, most glorious, most great, god of the storm-cloud, that dwellest
in the heaven, vouchsafe that the sun set not upon us nor the darkness
come near, till I have laid low upon the earth Priam's palace smirched
with smoke, and burnt the doorways thereof with consuming fire, and rent
on Hector's breast his doublet cleft with the blade; and about him may
full many of his comrades prone in the dust bite the earth.